SEP-2145: Standardize `tools/call` failure reporting (#2145)
modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol: seps/2145-standardize-tools-call-failure-reporting.md

## Motivation

SEP-1303 established that tool input validation failures are most useful when returned as tool execution errors, because models can read the message and self-correct.

In practice, additional `tools/call` failure modes are similarly actionable (or at least strategically useful) to surface to the model:

- **Unknown tool**: When the model calls a tool name that does not exist (e.g., stale tool list, wrong name, tool name produced by another tool), returning a tool execution error allows the model to select an alternative tool or re-list tools.
- **Tool not callable**: Servers may have tools that are temporarily unavailable, restricted, or disabled by policy. Returning a tool execution error allows the model to pick an alternative path or avoid repeated failing attempts.
- **Output schema failures**: If a tool declares `outputSchema` but fails to produce valid `structuredContent`, returning a tool execution error allows the model/client to fall back to unstructured output, retry with different parameters, or report a clear diagnostic.

> Today, the documentation is not sufficiently explicit about these scenarios, and some parts of the draft schema documentation imply that "errors in finding the tool" should be protocol errors. This causes inconsistent implementations and pushes "out-of-the-box" behavior into client-specific policy, which many hosts will not implement.

Reviewer: The schema docs *state* this directly (not "imply"), and SEP-1303 explicitly kept Unknown tools under Protocol Errors when it went Final. I think this reads more accurately as reversing a recorded decision than clarifying an under-specified one.

```suggestion
Today, the draft schema documentation states that "errors in finding the tool" should be protocol errors, and SEP-1303 retained that categorization when it went Final. This SEP proposes reversing that decision so that resolution failures are model-visible. The current split causes inconsistent implementations and pushes "out-of-the-box" behavior into client-specific policy, which many hosts will not implement.
```

## Specification

### Terminology

- **Protocol Error**: A JSON-RPC error response (`error` object) indicating a failure to process the request at the JSON-RPC / MCP method layer (e.g., invalid JSON-RPC, invalid request shape, method not found, server internal failure before a method result can be constructed).
- **Tool Execution Error**: A successful JSON-RPC response (`result` object) that contains a `CallToolResult` with `isError: true`, where the `content` describes the failure.
- **Tool Invocation**: The conceptual operation of attempting to run the named tool with provided `arguments` after the server has accepted a well-formed `tools/call` request.

### Normative requirements (server behavior)

Given a `tools/call` request that satisfies the `CallToolRequest` schema (i.e., it is not malformed at the protocol level), servers:

> 1. **MUST** report tool input validation failures as Tool Execution Errors, per SEP-1303.

Reviewer: SEP-1303 has no RFC 2119 keywords; it categorized input-validation failures as Tool Execution Errors but didn't make it a MUST. "Per SEP-1303" reads as if 1303 established the MUST when this SEP is the one introducing it.

```suggestion
1. **MUST** report tool input validation failures as Tool Execution Errors (extending the categorization established by SEP-1303).
```

   - This includes failures of JSON Schema validation against the tool's `inputSchema` as well as additional programmatic validation (ranges, invariants, cross-field checks, etc.).

2. **MUST** report tool resolution failures as Tool Execution Errors, including:
   - **Unknown tool**: `params.name` does not match any callable tool.
   - **Tool not callable**: the tool exists conceptually but cannot be executed (e.g., disabled, unavailable, policy-restricted).

3. **MUST** report tool execution failures as Tool Execution Errors, including:
   - Exceptions thrown by the tool implementation.

>    - Timeouts or cancellations that occur during tool execution (if the server can still return a `CallToolResult`).

Reviewer: The cancellation utility spec says receivers SHOULD NOT respond to a cancelled request and senders SHOULD ignore any response, so requiring `isError:true` for cancellations conflicts with that. This bullet also doesn't appear in the `tools.mdx` diff. If the intent is server-internal aborts (upstream timeout) rather than `notifications/cancelled`, it would help to say so.

```suggestion
   - Timeouts or server-internal aborts that occur during tool execution (if the server can still return a `CallToolResult`). Client-initiated cancellation continues to follow the [cancellation utility](../docs/specification/draft/basic/utilities/cancellation.mdx).
```

> 4. **SHOULD** report output validation failures as Tool Execution Errors when a tool declares an `outputSchema`, including:

Reviewer: `tools.mdx` already has "Servers MUST provide structured results that conform to `outputSchema` / Clients SHOULD validate." Worth a cross-reference here so it's clear how this server-side SHOULD-report relates to that pair (defense-in-depth, or shifting the validator role?).

   - `structuredContent` is missing when the server/tool intended to provide structured output.
   - `structuredContent` is present but does not conform to `outputSchema`.
   - `structuredContent` is present but is not an object (root must be `type: "object"`).

5. **MUST** use Protocol Errors only for protocol-level failures, such as:

>    - Malformed requests that fail to satisfy the `CallToolRequest` schema (e.g., missing `params`, wrong types, unexpected fields at the request layer).

Reviewer: MCP request schemas are open (no `additionalProperties: false`), so unexpected fields don't fail validation. Listing them here as a `-32602` trigger pushes implementers toward rejecting forward-compatible requests.

```suggestion
   - Malformed requests that fail to satisfy the `CallToolRequest` schema (e.g., missing `params`, wrong types).
```

    ],
    "isError": true
  }
}
```

#### Tool execution error (tool not callable / disabled / policy-restricted)

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 5,
  "result": {
    "content": [
      {
        "type": "text",
        "text": "Tool unavailable: update_flight_details. This tool is disabled or policy-restricted."
      }
    ],
    "isError": true
  }
}
```

#### Tool execution error (output schema validation failure)

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 6,
  "result": {
    "content": [
      {
        "type": "text",
        "text": "Tool produced invalid structured output for get_weather: structuredContent did not conform to outputSchema."
      }
    ],
    "isError": true
  }
}
```

### Specification text changes (draft targets)

This SEP intends to update the draft specification text in:

- `docs/specification/draft/server/tools.mdx` (Error Handling section) to:
  - Treat "Unknown tools" (tool name resolution) as a Tool Execution Error for `tools/call`.
  - Add explicit categories for "tool not callable" and "output schema validation failures" as Tool Execution Errors.
  - Keep Protocol Errors focused on malformed `CallToolRequest` and server-level failures.

> - `schema/draft/schema.ts` documentation for `CallToolResult.isError` to remove/adjust language suggesting that "errors in finding the tool" should be protocol errors, aligning it with the above requirements.

Reviewer: The PR diff doesn't include this `schema.ts` change. The current `CallToolResult.isError` JSDoc still says errors in finding the tool should be reported as an MCP error response, which directly contradicts the resolution-failure MUST above. Needs the schema hunk plus a regenerate.

> - `schema/draft/schema.ts` documentation for `CallToolResult.isError` to remove/adjust language suggesting that "errors in finding the tool" should be protocol errors, aligning it with the above requirements.

Reviewer: There's also `InvalidParamsError` in `schema.ts` whose JSDoc Tools bullet asserts the opposite, plus `schema/draft/examples/InvalidParamsError/unknown-tool.json` and `invalid-tool-arguments.json` which render into the Schema Reference. Without updating those, `schema.mdx` will contradict `tools.mdx` after this lands.

```suggestion
- `schema/draft/schema.ts` documentation for `CallToolResult.isError` to remove/adjust language suggesting that "errors in finding the tool" should be protocol errors, aligning it with the above requirements.
- `schema/draft/schema.ts` documentation for `InvalidParamsError` (Tools bullet) and the associated example files (`examples/InvalidParamsError/unknown-tool.json`, `invalid-tool-arguments.json`) so the generated Schema Reference matches.
```

Author: Hi @localden , missed notification about this one. I'll review the comments and address/resolve them tomorrow; PR also needs updating with latest, as it has some conflicts.

EDIT: Comments addressed

> #### Proposed draft wording for `docs/specification/draft/server/tools.mdx` (Error Handling)

Reviewer: The proposed wording here includes "Clients SHOULD provide tool execution errors to language models…" but the actual `tools.mdx` diff in this PR doesn't add that sentence. Either the diff or this block should be brought in line.

Reviewer: A few more drift items in the same block: the `tools.mdx` diff drops the "arguments do not match tool `inputSchema`" clause from the input-validation bullet, reorders output-validation before input-validation, and uses different example message formats than the templates and Examples section here. Probably easiest to regenerate the `tools.mdx` hunk from this block verbatim once it settles.

   - Tool availability failures (disabled, unavailable, policy-restricted)
   - Input validation errors (e.g., date in wrong format, value out of range; arguments do not match tool `inputSchema`)
   - Output validation errors (e.g., tool declared `outputSchema` but returned missing or non-conforming `structuredContent`)
   - API failures
   - Business logic errors

**Tool Execution Errors** contain actionable feedback that language models can use to self-correct and retry with adjusted parameters or alternative strategies.
**Protocol Errors** indicate issues with the request structure or method support itself.
Clients **SHOULD** provide tool execution errors to language models to enable self-correction.
Clients **MAY** provide protocol errors to language models, though these are less likely to result in successful recovery.
```

#### Proposed adjustment to `CallToolResult.isError` documentation (draft schema)

This SEP proposes changing the `CallToolResult.isError` documentation to treat "errors in finding the tool" as a Tool Execution Error for `tools/call` (i.e., return `CallToolResult` with `isError: true`) when the request itself is well-formed.

## Rationale

> - **Aligns with existing SDK behavior**: As noted in the Nov 7 discussion, both the Python and TypeScript SDKs already return `CallToolResult` with `isError: true` for unknown tools, disabled tools, and various output schema failures. Making this behavior normative improves interoperability and reduces host-specific divergence.

Reviewer: This is now backwards: [typescript-sdk#1389](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/typescript-sdk/pull/1389) merged in March to bring the TS SDK back to the current spec (protocol error for unknown tool), and [python-sdk#1872](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/python-sdk/pull/1872) proposes the same. So today the TypeScript SDK does the opposite of what this SEP mandates. Is that intended?

- **Improves model recovery**: Even when the model cannot "fix" the underlying cause (e.g., tool disabled), it can adapt (use a different tool, ask the user, or take a different path). Hiding these failures behind protocol errors often prevents that.
- **Preserves protocol integrity**: Protocol errors remain appropriate for malformed requests and method-level failures; this SEP does not attempt to redefine JSON-RPC semantics.

## Backward Compatibility

This SEP does not change JSON-RPC framing or introduce new required fields.

> However, it is a **behavioral change** for servers that currently return Protocol Errors for tool resolution and output validation failures. Clients that rely on a JSON-RPC error response for these cases will need to handle `CallToolResult.isError: true` equivalently.

Reviewer: I think this needs to be reconciled with the earlier TS change I mentioned. That PR brought the TS SDK into conformance with the current spec (protocol error for unknown tool); this SEP would make that change wrong. Which one reflects the intended direction?
